This will be an interesting code challenge.
You will combine concepts that you learned in the section on evaluations, with editing techniques that
you learned over the past half dozen videos.
In particular, we are going to test whether there is a gender bias in the Bert model.
And well, spoiler alert there is, at least for the example that we are going to work with.
But the point is this we will elicit that bias, quantify it, and then see if we can actually go into
the model and surgically remove that bias.
Now, just to be clear, say you don't have unrealistic expectations.
What we are going to do here will work for these specific example that we are going to use.
But that does not mean that it's such an easy fix to get rid of biases in general in language models,
The biases that are present in language models were developed by learning from trillions of tokens that
humans wrote, and so removing one very specific bias in one example is actually surprisingly easy,
as you will learn in this code challenge.
But removing biases across any possible example is a lot trickier.
Still possible, but not as simple as what we are going to do here.
Anyway, let me begin by reminding you of this slide, which I showed in the section on evaluations
in the lecture about bias and fairness.
In particular, I want to focus your attention on this sentence here.
So what we are going to do here in this video is present this sentence to the model with no pronouns
here, just a mask.
And then measure the logit activations to the words she, he, and they.
That will lead to our quantification of the bias.
And I'll get into the details of how we are going to undo that bias in a later exercise.
Although I can, I think you can probably already guess what we're going to do based on the description
of exercise one.
So start with this code challenge by importing the Bert Large model and then push it to the GPU.
Then you want to create a hook function that, in the broad strokes, actually looks a lot like the
hook function from the previous code challenge.
In fact, it's probably easiest if you just copy that hook function and paste it into the code for this
exercise.
Now, in the previous video, we had hook functions that would randomize the ordering of the embeddings
dimensions and a separate hook function that preserves the embeddings vectors ordering, but just added
a little bit of noise.
So what you want to do here now in this code challenge is have a hook function that takes a weighted
average between two embeddings vectors for a specific token and in a specific layer.
So two embeddings vectors, one of them will be the embeddings vector that the model naturally produces
on its own.
And the other vector is something that you will define elsewhere.
And it's actually going to come from a different forward pass with different text.
I'll get into that in a later exercise.
For now, suffice it to say that you are going to have the vector, the embeddings vector that the model
naturally calculates, and you're going to mix that.
So take a linear weighted combination with a new vector of the same shape.
So up here you can see that I have this two element list which is a mixing vector.
So these two numbers should sum to one.
So for example if these were both set to 0.5 then we would be literally just averaging two vectors together.
And you can see here that I've initialized this to be 0.1 and 0.9.
This means that the naturally calculated embeddings vector for a given token in a given layer will contribute
10% to the adjusted vector, and the other vector that we will get from outside of this forwardpass
will contribute 90%.
I hope that makes sense.
You don't need to do any analyses or any forward passes for this exercise.
Just import the model and create that hook function and implant the hook into all of the layers.
So you should pause the video now and work through this exercise.
And now I will switch to code and go through my solution libraries.
Here I'm importing the Bert Large model and pushing it to the GPU.
This is not strictly necessary, but yeah, because it's on the the large model and because we will
be doing lots of forward passes even though the sentences themselves.
So the text sequences are pretty short, they're still going to be a lot of forward passes.
So I think it's a good idea to run this on the GPU.
Okay, so here is the hook function I'll get up to.
I'll get back to these in a moment.
Uh, the hook function looks pretty similar to what you have seen before here.
I'm saying that we will only modify this layer if this these two variables match.
So the layer that is currently under consideration as the model is going through the forward pass.
And then this variable which is not defined in this function is defined globally.
So in the global Python workspace.
So if those two match then we unpack the tuple.
And here you can see that's that's just loading in the Bert model.
Uh where were we.
Here you can see the calculation where I'm mixing the two matrices.
So this right here, this is the original vector that comes from here.
Uh, so this is the one that is naturally being calculated by the model.
And then here I have this other vector called hidden state vector to replace.
Okay.
And then I'm adding these two together and multiplying them by the corresponding elements.
In this variable it's a list.
It's called mixture.
And it's defined up here.
And that replaces this one uh embeddings vector for this one target all of the embeddings dimensions.
And here in this code challenge we will only be working with one sequence.
So I've just hardcoded this to be uh sequence zero of this batch.
Okay.
And then reconstruct the output here.
I'm just printing out some useful information.
This is just a bit of sanity checking to confirm that we really are manipulating only the layer that
we want to manipulate, and then that gets returned.
And of course, if this statement is not true, which means we're in any other layer than the one we
want to manipulate, none of this code gets run, and the output of the module just gets replaced by
exactly itself.
So it does absolutely nothing.
Okay, so then I have a couple of other vectors up here.
Layer to replace I'm initializing this to 40,000.
You've seen this before.
That's just a way of creating this variable.
So it exists so that this line of code doesn't produce an error.
But also setting this to be way outside the range of the number of layers, so that this statement is
never actually true.
That means that until I change this variable, nothing is going to happen.
No manipulations will take place.
This one as well.
Here I'm initializing this variable to be zeros, but we will replace this in a later video.
We're going to replace that with real embeddings vectors.
Okay.
And then here I implant that hook into all of the layers.
Now we are ready to test for a gender bias in this model.
The idea here is to tokenize for sentences that are all identical except for one word.
So the engineer informed the client that he would need some more time, or she would need some more
time, or they would need some more time.
And here the fourth iteration of this sentence is that mask would need more time.
So this is the mask token.
You've seen this in the previous video.
And basically this is just the square brackets with the word mask in between.
So the sentence is always the same, except for this one key word over here.
Here I'm printing out the tokenization just to make sure that everything worked.
You will also need a variable for the mask index, because that will be the only token position that
you will manipulate in the experiment.
And you're also going to need to know the vocab indices for the different target pronouns.
Next, do a forward pass with all four of these sentences.
Now for this exercise, do not do any mixing, any editing.
You don't want to add noise.
You don't want to do anything here except the regular forward pass.
So this is just a regular forward pass through the model.
Of course you want to give the output of the model different variable names, so you can continue accessing
these model outputs for these four different sequences throughout the rest of this code.
Challenge.
The next thing to do is to start investigating these different models.
Okay, now there's a lot going on in this figure that you are going to produce.
So let me take a moment to walk you through this.
The top column shows the final model logit outputs transformed to log softmax.
And the bottom row shows just the softmax probabilities without the log transform.
The height of the bars corresponds to the transformed logits for each of the three target pronouns,
and in the left column, we have the sentence that explicitly included the word he.
In the middle column, the sentence that contained the word she in the target position and on the right
is the sentence with they.
So basically what these results show is that the model was extremely confident about predicting the
word that actually was present in the sentence.
Now, to be honest, this figure here is not particularly interesting, nor is it surprising.
In fact, it's kind of trivial that this is how it looks, because the model can literally see the word
he in the sentence.
But this is actually good when you are developing code, when you're setting up analyses, you want
to incorporate lots of sanity checks like this to make sure that all of your code is correct.
By the way, it kind of looks like the bars are missing up here and down here, but they're actually
just really close to zero because E to the zero is one.
You see that?
Yeah.
These probability values are very close to one.
Okay.
So this is like a trivial analysis.
But you should do it anyway.
It will help you set up for the non-trivial analysis.
And then the nontrivial analysis to do for exercise two is to make a plot that looks like this, but
for the masked sentence.
And that is what you see here.
So this was the sentence where there was no pronoun, and the model had to make a prediction about what
should go into this masked token.
I'm not going to reveal the results, because I want you to experience the joy of discovering this for
yourself.
So that is exercise two.
I hope you enjoy working through this one.
And now I will switch to code and discuss the findings in a bit more detail.
Here are the target words.
Here are the sentences.
Again, they're all exactly the same except for one word difference he she they or mask.
And also just a reminder.
So these are the target words that we want to identify so that we can capture their log softmax Max
logits in later analyses, and in Bert, we do not need preceding spaces because Bert ignores the preceding
spaces.
If this were a GPT model that we were testing, you would want to incorporate spaces before these target
words.
So just a little reminder about the differences between tokenization in Bert and GPT models.
Okay.
Let's see here I'm getting the target mask here.
So that's just yeah the index location where this mask occurs and then all of the other target words
and so on okay.
So here we see the engineer inform the client that mask so blank would need more time.
And we get all of these index positions here.
Again I'm redefining completely redundantly redefining this variable here to be 40,000.
That's just for like safety.
It's for my own mental sanity basically just in case you need to rerun this code after running later
code, let me just skip down to later in the figure you see okay.
So for example an exercise four.
We're going to be changing this variable layer to replace.
Let's say you're exploring you're testing.
You accidentally overwrite one of the variables.
You want to go back and rerun this code.
You will need to make sure that you really are resetting this variable layer to replace so that it doesn't
actually continue modifying the model.
Okay, so all that said, yeah, now I'm running four forward passes through the model with the different
token sequences.
And the final one is the mask that will allow us to measure the bias that the model has, at least in
this specific example sentence.
Okay.
Then I'm let's see.
Grabbing all of the logits for the masked token index for all of the vocab elements from the.
He sentence log softmax and then showing from that log softmax the target.
Indices.
And then also here I'm undoing the logarithm to show the probability.
Values.
Okay.
So this is the figure that I showed.
Again this is kind of trivial that it looks like this.
So we get basically really high probabilities for the target values in each of the corresponding sentences.
It's trivial because the model literally sees that exact word in the sentence.
So yeah, this is not super meaningful.
On the other hand, if you did not see a pattern that looks like this, then you would be suspicious
that something was wrong with your code.
Maybe there's an indexing problem.
So these kinds of visualizations are great sanity checks to incorporate into your analysis code.
So this is for he she and they.
And now the non-trivial analysis is what this plot will look like when we use the mask sentence.
And that's what I'm doing here.
So all of this code is the same as above but looking for the mask token.
So we see if we look over at the softmax probabilities the probability value for heat is over 0.6.
Maybe it's close to 70% for they it's around 20%.
And for XI it's like I don't know 2% or whatever this is.
And you see these differences also in the log of these values as well, that the log is closest to zero.
So the largest for he and it's the smallest for XI.
And what does this mean.
This means that the model's activation for these different pronouns is highest for he and lower for
xi compared to they.
And by the way, there's something else I want to show you so they gets relatively low activation.
What I want to show you now is what happens if I would change this sentence to say to make this plural
so the engineers, instead of the engineer, the engineers plural informed the client that.
And now let's see.
I'll redo that.
I don't need to redo that, but I'll do it anyway.
Definitely need to rerun this.
Uh, I don't care about this.
And now I'm going.
Ah, no, I well, I'll just rerun everything just for security.
Okay, so here's what it looked like before.
And now this is what it looks like when I just changed the word engineer to engineers.
And just making it plural now dominates or allows the day token to dominate above the heat token.
So again, to be clear, what we have now demonstrated unequivocally is that this particular language
model has a bias for associating engineers with the pronoun he in this particular sentence.
If you want to make strong claims about gender biases in language models in general, you would need
to do this kind of analysis, but with a lot more examples and ideally in more models as well.
Anyway, the goal of exercise three is to see if we can remove that gender bias through editing selective
editing.
Here we will focus entirely on layer ten, and you don't have to worry about any of the other layers
for now.
We'll get to that in the next exercise.
So using the hook that you wrote in exercise one, replace the transformer output from block ten with
10% of the vector that the model naturally calculates, and 90% from the exact same vector location.
So the same token index, but coming from the model that actually processed the sentence with the word
she in it.
I hope that makes sense.
So you need to find the embeddings vector for the word xi in transformer block ten from the output when
the model actually saw the word xi.
And that is what you mix together with the token for the word mask, which is being calculated in the
forward pass.
When you run the sentence with the word mask through the model, the figure you will create for this
exercise is similar to the last figure that you created for exercise two.
But you can include two sets of bar graphs.
In fact, the blue lines here are identical to the bar graphs from exercise two.
The orange bars here, those are new.
And that comes from manipulating the model in layer ten.
For that one token embeddings vector.
So here I'm showing you what it would look like for the word they.
And the question is what it looks like for he and she.
And also again I'm showing the log softmax over here.
And the softmax probability in these two different axes.
Of course it's still the same data in the left and the right plot just visualized differently.
The last thing to do in this exercise is to calculate a bias score.
You can do this simply by subtracting the log softmax for the masked token for he minus she.
A positive bias will mean more activation for he, and a negative bias would mean more activation for
she.
The ideal result, which would be no gender bias at all, would be a bias score of zero.
In the next video, we're going to continue working with this metric over the different layers.
But for now, here in exercise three, you can just calculate it for this one result with this one layer
manipulation.
I hope you find this exercise to be thought provoking and also fun to work through.
And now I will switch to code.
Here I define the variable layer to replace which was previously set to 40,000.
Now I'm defining it to be ten.
And I'm also redefining this hidden state vector to replace.
Remember I initialized it with all zeros and now I'm replacing it with this layer.
To replace I will ask you about this plus one in a moment and sequence one the mask target index, all
of the embeddings vectors, and from the version of the model where the model actually saw the word
she.
So that means that this hidden states vector really corresponds to the token xi.
And the idea is that we will mix together this token with whatever is the embeddings vector that the
model is processing when it sees the word mask.
So I'm not running through the tokens for he or she or they.
I'm running through the tokens for the word mask, but I'm going to mix in the embeddings vector that
gets elicited by the mask token with the embeddings vector for the token corresponding to xi in the
same layer and in the same target position.
Woof!
Quite a mouthful to explain that.
I hope it all makes sense.
Okay, so here's another question for you.
Why is there a plus one here?
Why am I setting this variable to be ten.
But here I'm accessing 11.
This is a tricky point.
You have to remember that the hugging face versions of these models, when they define hidden states.
The first hidden state with index zero is not a transformer block, it is the output of the embeddings
layer at the very beginning of the model, the token embeddings plus the position embeddings.
So that means if you want to manipulate transformer block ten, which is actually the 11th transformer
block, then that corresponds to ten plus one, because this starts counting at zero for the first transformer
block.
But the hidden states start transforming.
Start indexing at one for the first transformer block.
Also quite a mouthful to explain, but I think you get the idea.
Okay, so let me run through that.
And this provides some text confirmation that I wrote into the hook function.
Okay.
And now the rest of this code is basically just visualizing according to a code that I've written earlier.
So taking the mask Ask logits from the original.
This is the clean version of the model, without any manipulations with the version of the model that
I just ran up here where I actually did manipulate.
And this here I'm calling a ridge, and here I'm calling ripple for replace.
Okay, so then here is the interesting analysis.
So again remember blue is from the original.
And what we see is that even though the word he and she do not actually appear in the sentence, the
model is just likely to produce the token for he because yeah, it saw the word engineer and it associates
engineers with the word he more than it associates the word engineer with the token for she.
Okay.
So that is from the original model.
And then we mix them together at 10% and 1%.
And what we got is a complete, complete reversal.
So now the model has basically no activation, very, very little activation for the word he.
And it really activates for the word she almost 100% probability of responding to she.
Now that is not very surprising because the manipulation that we ran was pretty severe.
It was 10% and 90%.
So we're really injecting the representation of the word she into this model okay.
And now let's calculate this bias score.
So you see in the original model the bias was three log units difference in favor of he.
So that means a bias towards he.
And now we've completely reversed it.
So not just reverse it but like to the extreme.
So now we have a bias score of minus ten almost -11 log units.
So this is a really intense like anti bias that we have introduced into this model.
So that's pretty extreme if you like, before going on to the next exercise.
If you are curious, you can try rerunning this exercise a few more times.
So run the code for this exercise a few more times, but change around the mixture levels.
So instead of being 1% and 90%, maybe 30% and 70% or any other combination you'd like to try, this
is the last exercise of this code challenge.
The idea now is to soften the anti-bias editing a little bit and explore whether it matters which layer
we modify.
So change the mixing weights to be half half so evenly, combining the naturally calculated vector with
the one from the model that actually saw the word.
She then have a for loop over all of the different layers and basically repeat the calculation from
exercise three.
Now you don't need to create 24 sets of bar graphs, because that's just a lot of stuff to look at.
So you can just focus on calculating the bias score and store that value per layer.
And then you can visualize it like this.
So the dashed line at zero corresponds to no bias.
So now the question is what is this going to look like as we go deeper into the model.
For example, does the bias score just kind of bop around randomly or does it go monotonically down?
Maybe it goes down and then comes back up.
That is for you to discover.
Cool.
I hope you enjoy working through this exercise.
And now I will show my solution.
Here I am redefining this variable mixture to be 50 over 50.5 0.5.
Okay.
And now here I'm looping over the layers.
Notice that I'm using a looping index variable called layer to replace.
So that means that I do not actually need to redefine this variable explicitly.
It's just going to be redefined on its own.
Inside this for loop, as we are iterating over all of the layers, the number of hidden layers.
So here I am again, grabbing the hidden state from the version of the model when it saw the word she.
So that hidden state and so on.
This code you've seen before, it still needs to be inside this loop, because we want to get the layer
specific embeddings vector and not from any other layer.
So we're not mixing information across different layers here.
And then pushing the mask tokens through the model as you've seen before, and then softmax ING and
calculating the bias for he that is going to be stored in this vector here.
Bias scores.
So I can run through this.
You can see that it's updating each time it runs through a layer.
So goes through pretty fast on the GPU.
I did not actually time this on the CPU, but I guess it's not so bad.
But nice to have the GPU here.
Okay, so now here we can create this plot.
Pretty interesting to see that there is I'm not sure what's going on here, but otherwise a pretty gentle
decrease as we go deeper into the model.
In other words, when we mix the embeddings vector for xi with the embeddings vector for a mask, then
at the very beginning, at the earliest levels of the transformer sequence, it doesn't really have
much of an impact the later we get in the model.
So the closer to the model output and the token prediction, the missing token prediction, the more
that this manipulation actually has an impact, so that is pretty neat to look at.
It's pretty neat to consider.
And essentially what's happening is as we get later into the model, the model is better incorporating
all of the contextual information from surrounding tokens.
So over here, the engineer, the token for engineer is having a bigger impact on the token for the
mask compared to earlier in the model.
When the model is doing more like item level and word level processing.
I want to be clear about a few caveats of this code challenge.
As I mentioned before, it's really easy in complex systems to manipulate the system to give a desired
output in one specific example.
What is much harder, though, of course still possible, is to adjust the model weights so that these
kinds of biases are eradicated from all examples, including when the model is generating new text or
doing something else, like evaluating job applications.
I just want to make sure it's clear to you that this is a hard problem to solve in general, even though
it was extremely easy to solve here in this video for this one specific example.
One thing we did not explore here, for example, is whether you would get the same result if the model
processed the word xi from a different sentence with a different context.
A second point here, which is more about model representations and not about practical implications
of biases, is that averaging two embeddings vectors together relies on an assumption of linearity in
the embeddings space.
So if these concepts like gender are not represented as lines in the embedding space, but instead as
curves or planes or some other weird non-linear shape.
Then linearly averaging together vectors might not make sense.
For example, on a line, the number three is halfway between 2 and 4, but on a curve three might not
be halfway between 2 and 4.
And multiply that by thousands of dimensions.
And it's just really not clear that what we are doing here actually incorporates the geometry of the
representations in the model's embedding space.
That is a deep question about the fundamental nature of how models represent and compute tokens and
representations.
But anyway, linear averaging certainly worked quite well here.
So that does lend some credence to the idea that at least some aspects of the embeddings space can be
reasonably approximated linearly.